:memo: Document Rust runtime (#3035)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: docs/src/languages/rust.md

---

Platform.sh supports building and deploying applications written in Rust.

## Supported versions

| Grid and {{% names/dedicated-gen-3 %}} | {{% names/dedicated-gen-2 %}} |
|----------------------------------------|------------------------------ |
| {{< image-versions image="rust" status="supported" environment="grid" >}} | {{< image-versions image="rust" status="supported" environment="dedicated-gen-2" >}} |

You only need to specify the major version.
The latest compatible minor version and patches are applied automatically.

## Dependencies

The recommended way to handle Rust dependencies on Platform.sh is using Cargo.
Commit a `cargo.toml` and a `cargo.lock` file in your repository
so the system automatically downloads dependencies using Cargo.

## Building and running your app

Assuming your `cargo.toml` and `cargo.lock` files are present in your repository,
you can build your app using the `cargo build` command to produce a working executable.

You can then start it from the `web.commands.start` directive.
Note that the start command _must_ run in the foreground.
If the program terminates for any reason it is automatically restarted.

> The following basic [app configuration](../../create-apps/_index.md) is sufficient to run most Rust apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following basic [app configuration](../../create-apps/_index.md) is sufficient to run most Rust apps.
See the [complete example](#complete-example) below for more details.
```

            passthru: true
```

Note that there is still an Nginx proxy server sitting in front of your application. If desired, certain paths may be served directly by Nginx without hitting your application (for static files, primarily) or you may route all requests to the Rust app unconditionally, as in the example above.

## Platform.sh variables

Platform.sh exposes relationships and other configuration as [environment variables](../development/variables/_index.md).

To get the `PORT` environment variable (the port on which your app is supposed to listen),
use the following snippet:

```rust
let port : String = env::var("PORT").unwrap_or(String::from("8888"));
```

Note that some of the environment variables are in JSON format and are base64 encoded.
For example, to decode the `PLATFORM_RELATIONSHIPS`,
use the following snippet: 

```rust
    use base64::{Engine as _, engine::{general_purpose}};
    use serde_json::Value;

    let bytes = general_purpose::STANDARD.decode(env::var("PLATFORM_RELATIONSHIPS").unwrap_or(String::new())).unwrap();
    let psh_config: Value = serde_json::from_slice(&bytes).unwrap();
    println!("{}", psh_config["database"]);
```

## Complete example

> Here is a basic hello world app to illustrate how you can use Rust with Platform.sh. 
> To serve a static `index.html` file, you could follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a basic hello world app to illustrate how you can use Rust with Platform.sh. 
It builds from a simple `hello.rs` file to serve a static `index.html`.

Assuming the following `Cargo.toml`:

(snippet here)

follow these steps:
```

Reviewer: For (snippet here):

```
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

[[bin]]
name = "hello"
path = "hello.rs"

[dependencies]
time = "0.1.12"
regex = "0.1.41"
base64 = "0.21.0"
serde = { version = "1.0", features = ["derive"] }

serde_json = "1.0"
```

use the following snippet:

```rust
let port : String = env::var("PORT").unwrap_or(String::from("8888"));
```

Note that some of the environment variables are in JSON format and are base64 encoded.
For example, to decode the `PLATFORM_RELATIONSHIPS` environment variable,
use the following snippet: 

```rust
    use base64::{Engine as _, engine::{general_purpose}};
    use serde_json::Value;

    let bytes = general_purpose::STANDARD.decode(env::var("PLATFORM_RELATIONSHIPS").unwrap_or(String::new())).unwrap();
    let psh_config: Value = serde_json::from_slice(&bytes).unwrap();
    println!("{}", psh_config["database"]);
```

## Complete example

Here is a basic hello world app to illustrate how you can use Rust with Platform.sh. 
It builds from a `hello.rs` file to serve a static `index.html`.
Follow these steps:

1. Add the following `Cargo.toml` file to your repository:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello_world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

[[bin]]
name = "hello"
path = "hello.rs"

[dependencies]
time = "0.1.12"
regex = "0.1.41"
base64 = "0.21.0"
serde = { version = "1.0", features = ["derive"] }

serde_json = "1.0"
```

> 

Reviewer: I think we need one more step here

> 2. With [Cargo](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/getting-started/installation.html) and [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) installed, generate the `Cargo.lock` file:
>
>    ```bash
>    cargo generate-lockfile
>    ```
